Hello, and welcome to Philosophy 305 - Introduction to Formal Methods

Lecture 4 - Argument Forms

<new slide>

In this lecture I'll briefly revise the notion of validity I talked about last week, and then move on to a discussion of formalisation.

<new slide>

This material is in chapter 4 of for all x.

<new slide>

OK, so first a reminder of what we mean by validity. An argument is valid if the truth of the premises guarantees the truth of the conclusion. If the premises are true, then the conclusion has to be true too. Equivalently, an argument is valid when it is impossible for the premises to be true and the conclusion not true. This isn't what 'valid' always means in English, but this doesn't matter; it's the most important stipulation for you to remember in any formal philosophy course.

<new slide>

Some arguments are valid, but not in virtue of their form. The example I gave last week was Today is Wednesday, so tomorrow is Thursday. What makes that valid are facts about Wednesdays and Thursdays, namely that Wednesdays come before Thursdays. But some arguments are valid in virtue of their form. For example, the argument that has premises All kangaroos are wise, and Skippy is a kangaroo, and conclusion Skippy is wise, is valid. And that's not because of anything about Skippy, kangaroos or wisdom. It's a general fact about arguments with a certain structure.

The way we test for formal validity is we see if the argument is still valid if we vary some of the terms while keeping the form. If the argument is valid through all such changes, we say the argument is valid because of the form.

<new slide>

I said logic is the study of formal validity. And the definition of formal validity makes this key distinction between words that are part of the form, like 'all' and 'is', and words that are not, like 'Wednesday' and 'wise'. But this makes the notion of form seem really central to what we're doing, and you might have some serious questions about it.

For example, which words get treated as part of the form, and which are not? This will matter, because we will translate the types of terms differently when we translate sentences into formal notation.

<new slide>

When we talk about the form of the argument about Skippy, I said that the validity of the argument doesn't turn on anything about Skippy, kangaroos or wisdom. But that's actually a little quick. There are a couple of things you need to know to recognise that the argument is valid. You need to know that the word 'kangaroos' in the first premise, and the word 'kangaroo' in the second premise, are related. In this case, you need to know that 'kangaroos' is the plural of 'kangaroo'. This is something you know; you probably didn't even think about it when reading the argument. But it isn't obvious. Think about how non-obvious the equivalent fact would be if you were reading the argument in some other language, especially one with a non-Roman alphabet.

And you need to know that 'wise' is repeated, and means the same thing on each occasion. The first part of that is a little easier to manage. Computers aren't very smart, but they are very good at telling when a symbol is repeated - that's a skill of theirs that we leverage a lot. But it's not trivial to know that the repeated symbol has the same meaning on each occasion of use. That requires some substantial knowledge.

<new slide>

And last, once we've got the idea that some parts of the sentence are parts of its form, how do we manage expressing the sentence in a formal language while preserving its form? That's something we'll talk a lot about over today's lectures.

<new slide>

So back to our first question. What parts of the sentence are substantive parts of the sentence, and which are parts of its form. In this course, I'm going to have a fairly pluralist, pragmatist view on this question. This is not to say that pluralism or pragmatism is right - it's just that it's what I'll adopt. I wouldn't adopt it even for a course if I didn't think it was reasonable, so I guess I am committing to this kind of plural pragmatism being reasonable, but I'm not committing to it being right.

What I mean by pluralism, or pragmatism, is that different words get treated as formal for different purposes. For some purposes we'll just say there are a handful of formal words. For other purposes we will say that there are quite a lot of formal words. 

There is this funny thing that happens in logic courses. We often spend quite a bit of time talking about different logics. I've already talked about propositional logic, predicate logic, modal logic and maybe some others. Isn't that weird? Shouldn't it be that an argument either is logically valid or it isn't? Well, part of what's going on here is that the different logics are what result from taking different terms to be part of the formalism. Propositional logic is what you get if you have almost the smallest possible set of formal terms.

<new slide>

But for other purposes you might want to have a more expansive view. Here is an example that we won't do in this course, though we will do something similar. You could try and develop a logic of causation. And in that logic, 'caused' would be a formal word. So you could then ask whether this argument form - A caused B, B caused C, so A caused C - is valid.

<new slide>

And actually that argument sounds pretty good to me. But it really depends on taking 'caused' to be part of the formalism. If you are interested in the logic of nouns, verbs and adjectives - what is commonly called predicate logic - then it is a really bad argument form. And you can see that by noting that putting a different verb in the middle of the sentence destroys validity.

<new slide>

I'm not going to assume there is a single correct answer to this question of what's part of the form. In fact I'll assume the opposite - that for different purposes we will want to treat different things as being part of the form. 

And we'll start with this really really narrow treatment of what goes in the form. It is just a few sentential connectives: and, if, or and not.

<new slide>

Let's come back to this question about whether two word uses in an argument are uses of the same word, or of different words.

It would be super convenient if two word occurrences are occurrences of the same word type just in case they are spelled the same way. That would make life really easy. That is how simple computers work, though more sophisticated computers are using fancier rules. But in English it's wrong on both directions.

Sometimes we use the same word (in the most relevant sense) twice, but spell it differently on two occasions. That's what happened with 'kangaroo' and 'kangaroos'.

And sometimes we use two different words with the same spelling. If I hold up a baseball bat and say All bats can fly, and this is a bat, so this can fly, I'm clearly making a mistake. Or perhaps an incredibly lame joke.

<new slide>

These two points are related. Sometimes there are kinds of ambiguity that are best resolved by moving the problematic term into the formal system. The Carnap book spends a bit of time talking about how you might understand the sentence "Nothing is better than world peace". 

<new slide>

There is the natural reading. World peace is the best thing, no thing is better than it. 

<new slide>

But there is also an unnatural reading. There is this thing Nothing. Maybe it's what happens when everything is annihilated. And it's better than world peace. That's probably not what anyone who uses that sentence means. But it seems like a possible reading of the English sentence.

<new slide>

These quantificational terms, like 'something' and 'nothing' are really susceptible to this kind of structural ambiguity. And one motivation for putting terms like them into the category of formal words is that it gives us some tools to handle this kind of ambiguity inside logic.

<new slide>

So let's imagine we've figured out which terms we want to treat as formal terms. How does this help us analyse things logically? Well, the first thing we do is translate sentences from natural languages, like English, into formal languages. And there are three steps involved in such a translation.

First, we come up with a literal manual for translating the non-formal, non-logical parts of the sentences. Usually what we do is translate every term, or sentence, or whatever non-formal part there is, with a distinct letter.

<new slide>

Second, we are fairly liberal about using parentheses to separate out the structurally different parts of the sentence.

<new slide>

Third, we have symbols for each of the formal words. So we have a symbol for and, a symbol for or, and so on.

<new slide>

In the next lecture, we'll look in more detail about how we do this kind of translation from sentences in English into sentences in propositional logic.
