Hello, and welcome to Philosophy 305 - Introduction to Formal Methods

Lecture 5 - Forms in Propositional Logic

<new slide>

In this lecture we're going to look at how to translate English sentences into a form where we can use the tools of propositional logic on them. So we'll be translating them into a formal language where the only formal words are the sentential connectives that propositional logic works with: and, or, not, if and if-and-only-if.

<new slide>

The material here is from chapter 5 of for all x, though I'm really not going to cover all of what they do.

<new slide>

We start by replacing whole sentences, or things that could stand on their own as whole sentences.

Everything that's not one of these five terms is treated as a whole sentence, and replaced with a sentence letter. Any letter will do. If you are using more than 26 sentences - and we will never use more than 26 sentences - you can use numerical subscripts.

By convention, we start with p and move through the alphabet. I think this is because p is the first letter in proposition, and then we move from there. But I'm not entirely sure. Still, that's the usual convention.

There is no convention on whether lower case or capital letters are used. I prefer using lower case letters; for all x uses capital letters. This really is a matter of taste.

And not everyone starts with p and moves forward; some start with A. What matters is that each sentence gets a letter, beyond that there's a fair bit of flexibility.

Actually there is this weird thing in Carnap where for some purposes it requires you start with P - it won't recognise A as a sentence letter. I can't figure out quite when or why it does this, and maybe it's just a bug. But it's something to bear in mind. There really isn't as much standardisation of formalism in this field as you might expect.

<new slide>

Each of the formal terms gets its own symbol.

And gets this wedge, sort of an upside down vee.

Or gets the right way up vee.

Not gets this kind of hook symbol - a dash with a small vertical bar down at the end. That's not a standard keyboard symbol, so sometimes we'll use symbols that are part of a standard keyboard. So perhaps a hyphen (the key next to 0), or a tilde (the squiggle which is in the upper left of some keyboards).

If is an arrow, which is at least an easy to remember symbol.

And if-and-only-if is a two-headed arrow. We won't cover that symbol much, but the book includes it, so I will too.

<new slide>

OK, let's work through some examples. We'll start trying to translate this sentence: It will rain on Monday or it will rain on Tuesday.

And the dictionary we will use for this example is that M is It will rain on Monday, and T is It will rain on Tuesday. We'll keep with this dictionary for a while actually, because it's easy to remember.

Then the translation is M then the vee symbol for or then T.

<new slide>

OK, let's try another really straightforward example. They'll get less straightforward soon, but it's good to warm up a bit. We'll translate It will rain on Monday and it will rain on Tuesday using the same dictionary.

The translation is M followed by the and-symbol, this sort of upside down vee, followed by T.

<new slide>

One slightly harder example: If it rains on Monday, it will rain on Tuesday.

Now one thing to note about this is that we're translating from this super rich and detailed language, English, into a really restricted language. And one way in which our new language is restricted is that it doesn't really have tenses. So we're going to just think of "It will rain on Tuesday" and "It rains Tuesday" as the same sentence. And we'll represent it with T. So this sentence just becomes M arrow T.

<new slide>

This one is just a bit harder. There are two distinct things going on here.

One is that we'll treat 'but' as meaning just the same thing as 'and'. Exactly what the difference between them in English is is this really hard question. It's surprisingly hard to say even roughly what the difference is actually. If you have thoughts about this maybe we should talk about it on the discussion boards. But for now just note that we're translating 'but' simply as 'and'. We don't have tenses in this language, and we don't have distinctions between forms of 'and'.

The second thing is that one of the halves of the and-sentence is itself a logically complicated sentence. The right-hand side of the compound is that it will *not* rain on Tuesday. So it gets represented by not-T. So the whole sentence becomes M wedge not T.

<new slide> 

To get any more complicated than this, we need to talk about how parentheses work in this system. As in math, the role of parentheses is to tell you which order to join things together in. They are needed because otherwise there is hopeless ambiguity in certain sentences. Here is one of them.

It will rain on Monday and it will rain on Tuesday or it will rain on Wednesday.

<new slide>

We could translate that as sentence 1, which says that Either M and T are both true, or W is true.

Or we could translate it as sentence 2, which says that M is true, and either T or W is true.

What is a situation where one of these is true but not the other? Pause if you want to think about it.

<new slide>

We can tell that the sentences are different because there are situations where one of them is true and the other is not true. For example, If it only rains on Wednesday, then 1 is true but 2 is false. 1 is true because it says either Monday and Tuesday are both rain days, or Wednesday is a rain day. And Wednesday is a rain day. But 2 says that two things are true, and the first of them is that Monday is a rain day. And that's false.

<new slide>

Question for you to think about, are there any other situations where 1 and 2 differ, where one of them is true and the other is not true?

<new slide>

That's all for this lecture. Next time, we'll look at how the processes I've described in this lecture can be iterated.