Hello, and welcome to Philosophy 305 - Introduction to Formal Methods

Lecture 6 - Recursive Composition Rules

<new slide> 

In this lecture we're going to go over two things. First, we're going to look at how to iterate the translation procedures we used last time. That will allow us to translate longer sentences into the language of propositional logic. Second, we're going to look at how to understand longer sentences written in that language. The techniques for each of these tasks will be pretty similar, so it makes sense to do these jobs together.

<new slide>

We're now on to chapter 6.

<new slide>

The language of propositional logic has some fairly simple composition rules. The first rule is that there are some basic sentences. These are the sentence letters. Second, there are rules that say that if some things are sentences so are some other things. The effect of these simple rules is that there are infinitely many sentences.

<new slide>

It's a bit amazing that you can get an infinity of sentences from just these simple rules, but it's probably a procedure you've encountered before. (Though maybe not under this description.) For example, here is one way of characterising the natural numbers. 1 is a number. If n is a number, so is n + 1. The result of these two rules is that there are infinitely many numbers.

Or, to bring this back to logic, we get the same kind of phenomena in human languages like English. As a speaker of English, you can recognise that all the sentences on the list I'm about to show you are indeed sentences.

<new slide>

It will rain. That's clearly a sentence.

<new slide>

Alex thinks that it will rain. And that's a sentence too. 

<new slide>

Kim thinks that Alex thinks that it will rain. That's a sentence. It's a little harder to comprehend than the ones before, but only a little. Now the big step is the next one.

<new slide>

Alex thinks that Kim thinks that Alex thinks that it will rain. That's also a sentence. And it's not the same as any of the sentences so far. It could be false while all of the ones we've already looked at are true. But it's built out of just the same words, using just the same compositional rules, as the ones before it.

<new slide>

Once you've got that, you're off to infinity. (And beyond.)

<new slide>

Let's state the rule here a bit more precisely. English includes the following recursive rule. If _S_ is a sentence, and _N_ is a name, then _N thinks that S_ is a sentence. It's a recursive rule because it can be applied to its own output. Once we have that _N thinks that S_ is a sentence, we can treat that as the sentence that gets plugged into the rule.

Maybe you'd never seen this rule stated quite so pedantically, but as speakers of English you implicitly understood it. And, given some really simple building blocks to start with, it can be used to generate infinitely many sentences.
 
<new slide> 

We are going to use the same techniques to generate sentences in propositional logic. Here the rules.

First, various sentence letters are sentences.

Second, if _S_ and _T_ are sentences, then so are: Not-S, S or T, S and T, If S then T, S if and only if T.

<new slide> 

By applying these rules repeatedly, we get that the following are sentences

P
Q
P and Q
If Q, then (P and Q)
Not P
Q or not P

And then 7 says (If Q, then (P and Q)) if and only if (Q or not P)

We know it is a sentence because each side of the if and only if is a sentence. (We'd proven that already.) What we don't know is how to make sense of it.

<new slide> 

To get started on that project, the project of understanding what these long sentences mean, it helps to start with a new concept. This is the idea of a **Main Connective** of a sentence. Here's what we mean by that.

For any sentence you can make, there will be a 'last step' in the demonstration that it is a sentence. That last step will involve copying down 1 or 2 other sentences, and adding a connective. On the previous slide, you copy down 4 and 6, and put a double headed arrow between them.

The main connective is that last connective you add. It covers, in a sense we're about to make clear, the whole sentence.

<new slide>

Here's a rule for telling whether a connective is the main connective. First, we'll talk about binary connectives. These are connectives that connect a pair of sentences. That's all of the connectives we've looked at so far except not.

A binary connective is the main connective if (and only if) either side of it are two complete sentences. So look at this sentence: P and if Q, R.

The and is the main connective because either side of it are P, and if Q, R. And those are both sentences.

<new slide>

What about that arrow? We can tell it is not the main connective because either side of it is, well, junk. I've written up on the slide what you get if you look at either side of that arrow. Neither side is a sentence, as you can see from the weird parentheses.

<new slide>

The plan for the rest of the lecture is to work through a particular example. What we're going to do is break up the sentence into its constituent parts, and then break up those parts into their constituent parts, and so on until we are done. At each stage, we want to break a sentence down into its main connective, and the part (or parts) its main connective connects.

This is from Carnap. What it wants you to do at each stage is write into the text box the main connective, and then it will do the breaking up if you get it right. So what's the main connective of this sentence?

<10 second music>

<new slide>

It's the arrow.

<new slide>

If you enter that into the search box, the program will show you the sentences either side of the arrow. And then it asks you to answer the same question for one of those sentences. Which one its asking for is indicated by writing it in red. (This isn't the best way to represent things; if you are red-black color blind this won't be very clear. Let me know if there's a problem and I'll figure out a better representation.)

Anyway, the sentence it is asking for is R or S, and it only has one connective, so its main connective is or. That takes us all the way to the atomic sentences.

<new slide>

Now for the right hand side. The main connective of this sentence is 'if-and-only-if'.

<new slide>

One side of the if and only if is a sentence letter, but the other side needs to be broken down further.

<new slide>

And then we just need to enter the main connective for that not-Q, which is the not.

<new slide>

That's all for chapters 1 and 2; in the next lecture we'll move on to chapter 3, and use these tools for analysing arguments.