Hello, and welcome to Philosophy 305 - Introduction to Formal Methods

Lecture 2.4 - Understanding Truth Tables

<new slide>

Today we're introducing a new tool, truth tables. Truth tables have two big downsides, and two big upsides.

They are only useful in propositional logic, so they won't be that useful to us later in the course.

And they can be very slow to use once problems get to any level of complexity.

Those are the two big downsides. So why are we doing them?

Well, they are fairly straightforward to use. Indeed, within about 5 or 6 short lectures, I'll have said all that I need to say for you to use them.

And they are incredibly powerful. They can do everything you want in propositional logic. But that's true only within propositioanl logic - they aren't expandable the way some other tools we'll develop are. But within propositional logic they are a perfectly powerful way of showing something is valid.

But beyond that, they are also as powerful a tool as you could want for proving invalidity.

In general in logic you need different tools for proving validity and proving invalidity. But truth tables can do both jobs at once. And they are fully algorithmic. We won't have to talk about good heuristics or clever ideas about how to use them. They are a brute force procedure that provide conclusive proofs that valid arguments are valid, and that invalid arguments are invalid. That combination - of being algorithmic and of proving both validity and invalidity in the same method - is very unusual. And it is part of what makes propositional logic so distinctive.

<new slide>

The material for today is in chapters 9 to 11 of forall x, though I'm not really covering it in the same order, since I like to introduce the same material a different way.

<new slide>

So what are truth tables?

Well, think about all the combinations of truth values for the atomic sentences in a longer sentence, or in an argument. So if the sentence has a letter A, a letter B, and a letter C, then one combination is that A is true, B is false, and C is true. And another combination is that A and B are false, while C is true. There are a lot of these combinations. Well, for three variables there are 8, but there can quickly get to being a lot.

<new slide>

For each possible combination, evaluate the truth of every part of every sentence in an argument. So as well as working out the truth values of whole sentences, we'll work out the truth value of either side of compound sentences. And if those sides have parts, we'll work out the truth values of those too.

<new slide>

Once we've done that, we'll see if there is any combination of truth values for the sentence letters - any way of saying that A is true or false, B is true or false and so on, that makes the premises true and the conclusion false.

<new slide>

If an argument is invalid, there will be one combination of values where the premises are true and the conclusion false.

<new slide>

If there is no such combination, the argument is valid. We've learned that it is impossible for the premises to be true and the conclusion false.

<new slide>

If there is such a combination, tentatively mark the argument invalid. It looks like there is a possibility where the premises are true and the conclusion false.

<new slide>

We'll come back to why 'tentatively'. The short version is that not every one of these combinations corresponds to a real possibility. But we'll ignore this problem most of the time for this week's lectures.

<new slide>

Here is how a truth table is put together.

Each row corresponds to a combination of truth values for the atomic sentences.

Each column lists the truth value of a sentence given that combination.

It's a little tricky to get used to which value in the truth table corresponds to which sentence. The big rule is that you put the truth value of a sentence under its main connective. 

That's easier to see in practice than in theory I think, so I'll work through some examples.

<new slide>

OK, so here's one example. In this lecture I'm not going to go over how to build one of these monsters; I just want to explain how to read it.

<new slide>

This is a truth table for a single sentence, not an argument. 

We'll get to arguments in a bit.

The sentence is this slightly odd sentence, either if p then q, or if q then p.

<new slide> 

And we will get to building these, but let's start with comprehension.

<new slide> 

Each of the four rows represent a way things could be. For instance, the second row, which I've bolded, represents how things are if $P$ is true and $Q$ is false.

Note that I'm using these slightly funny Ts and Fs for True and False. Carnap doesn't do this, but Boxes and Diamonds does, and I think it's a bit helpful to keep in mind that these letters have a very distinctive role.

<new slide>

This table has four rows. Why? Well, there are two basic letters $P$ and Q$. Each table has 2 to the power n rows, where n is the number of basic letters. So this table has two squared, i.e., four, rows.

There are four rows because there are 2 sentence letters - $P$ and $Q$ - each of which could take 2 values, so there are $2 \times 2 = 4$ combinations of values.

<new slide> 

If there had been three sentence letters, there would be eight rows. If there had been four sentences letters, then 16 rows. Five would mean 32 rows, and so on. These tables can get large, and this is why they are impractical for a lot of purposes. But they are still useful to know about.

<new slide>

So let's now read it from left to right. The columns under the letters reflect the value of the atomic sentences in each row. 

What about on the right? Well, the smallest sentences are just those letters again. And we cut and paste those values from the left hand side. I mean literally, if you're doing these in something that writes tables, you can literally cut and paste.

<new slide> 

On this slide, I've put the values for P on the right in blue to make them stand out. And you can see they are just copied and pasted from the left.

<new slide>

Now we get to an odd thing - how the truth tables handle arrows. I'll talk about this a lot in upcoming lectures. But for now I want to say what the column in blue means. 

<new slide> 

Each letter here is giving the truth value of the sentence that has that first arrow as its main connective. That is, P arrow Q.

<new slide>

And the column in blue on this slide gives the truth values for Q arrow P.

<new slide> 

Now that I've told you what these letters under the arrow mean, you might be very surprised by them. Hold that thought - we'll get back to it.

<new slide> 

The column that I've put in red gives the truth value of the sentence whose main connective is or.

And the sentence whose main connective is or is, it turns out, the whole sentence.

<new slide>

Ultimately the red column is all we really care about. Everything else is just like showing our working.

<new slide>

This is an interesting table because the letters in the big red column are all Ts. And that means that the whole sentence is true in every one of the possibilities. And that means that the sentence is a logical truth.

<new slide>

But that's getting ahead of ourselves a bit. The big takeaway lesson from today is that every letter in these tables represents the truth value of a sentence in a possibility. Which possibility - the one given by the sentence letters on the left. Which sentence - the one whose main connective is directly above it. 

Next time, we'll start building these tables.
