Hello, and welcome to Philosophy 305 - Introduction to Formal Methods

Lecture 16 - Building Truth Tables

<new slide>

Today we're going to go start on the process of building truth tables. And in particular we will look at the most basic component of them - the rules for the connectives.

<new slide>

The material for today is in chapter 9 of for all x.

<new slide>

First, a word of warning. There is going to be some straight memorisation involved here. It's not too much, and you can always refer back to the books. But if you don't do the memorisation, it will be a bit like doing long multiplication while having to look up the times tables.

And what you have to memorise are the truth tables for the individual connectives.

<new slide>

So here, for starters, is the truth table for negation.

This one isn't too hard to figure out. It says that the truth value of a negated sentence is the opposite of the truth value for the unnegated sentence. Whatever truth value A has, Not A has the opposite.

<new slide>

What about for and? Well, here the rule is that an and sentence is true when the sentences on either side of the and are both true, and false otherwise.

<new slide>

The previous slide said that in tabular form, and this slide says in it words.

<new slide>

Here is the table for disjunctions, i.e., sentences with or as the main connective. It has Ts in the top three rows, then an F. That is, when at least one of the two sides is T, so is the whole sentence.

<new slide>

And on this slide I've said the same thing in words.

<new slide>

Now the surprising one, the table for conditionals. Like for or, it has three Ts. But they aren't all together. Rather, the table goes TFTT. If A is true and B is false, that's the second line of the table, then If A then B is false. Otherwise, If A then B is true.

<new slide>

One consequence of that definition is that these three sentences have the same truth tables.

First, If A then B.
Second, either not A or B.
Third, it is not the case that A and not B.

When you define a conditional this way, so that it is equivalent to the second and third sentences, it is called a material implication. Material here doesn't really mean like it has to do with rocks and substances. Rather, it means something more like as a matter of fact. Given the facts, plus A, we can derive B. That's what we're taking If A then B to mean.

<new slide>

Now this definition has some weird consequences. Note in particular that if A is false, then If A then B is true. So we can let our imaginations run wild with weird conditionals that turn out to be true on this account. Anything with a false left hand side will be true.

<new slide>

Now I'm going to spend a bit of time later in the course going over why you might think this is a good account of the conditional. 

<new slide>

The main reason we're going to consider is that it makes these two arguments have the same validity - i.e., they are either both valid or both invalid - no matter what you pick for A, B and C.

Argument One: A, B therefore C.
Argument Two: A, therefore If B then C.

If you think that if one of these is valid the other should be as well, then you should like this truth table for arrow.

<new slide>

But in the short term I'm not going to dwell too much on why we use that truth table - I'm for now mostly telling you that's what we do.

Next time we'll using these tools to build up longer truth tables.
