Hello, and welcome to Philosophy 305 - Introduction to Formal Methods

Lecture 3.1 - Propositional Logic

<new slide>

In this lecture we're introducing propositional logic, and talking about what it is.

<new slide>

This doesn't correspond to any particular part of the book, but I think it's helpful before going onto chapter 12.

The second half of this lecture is revision. Normally I would do something like this in class to make sure stuff hadn't been forgotten over the weekend. I'm less sure it's useful in recorded classes, so if things sound too repetitive, skip ahead to the next lecture. But maybe some revision will be helpful too.

<new slide>

Classical propositional logic starts with one big assumption. The assumption is that any sentence is either true or false, but not both. That's to say, every sentence has precisely one of the two classical truth values: TRUE and FALSE. I'll often write these as T and F. 

<new slide>

It's worth being hyper pedantic about what this assumption comes to. There are three parts to it, and every part is rejected by some philosophers - though usually different philosophers reject different parts.

One assumption is that there are only two truth values - True and False. So we're ruling out truth values like being half-true, or three-quarters-true.

The second assumption is that all sentences have one of these truth values. So we're ruling out that some sentences might simply not have truth values. This is probably the most controversial one. There are lots of cases where you might think a sentence, even a simple declarative sentence, might not have a truth value. 

For example, if I don't have a sister, you might think the sentence "My sister is a talented acrobat" isn't true (she isn't one of the talented acrobats), but also isn't false. After all, it's not like she's not a talented acrobat. We're going to assume, however, that every sentence (or at least every sentence that is suitable to go in an argument) is either true or false. For what it's worth, the standard story is that this sentence about my non-existent sister is false, but false in a weird way.

The final assumption is that no sentence is both true and false. If someone has ever asked you a question, and you've answered "Well, yes and no", we're going to assume that you aren't speaking completely correctly.

<new slide>

Traditionally, classical logic is divided into two parts, called propositional logic and predicate logic. We're just going to focus on the propositional part.

The difference between them turn on what counts as a **structural** feature of a sentence. Remember in the previous lecture I said that logic is about what arguments are valid in terms of structural features of the argument. I didn't go on to tell you how to tell the difference between the structural parts of a sentence and the non-structural parts. It turns out this is a really hard question, and doesn't have a simple answer. 

In practice, different logics treat different words as being structural. Propostional logic recognises only a very small number of terms as being part of the structure of a sentence.

<new slide>

The only terms that we treat as structural are terms that can be used to connect sentences.

The first is 'and'. The use of 'and' that we care most about is when it is used to make a longer sentence out of two shorter sentences. So consider the way 'and' is used in "Jack went up the hill and Jill went up the hill too". Presumably that's somewhat related to the use of 'and' in "Jack and Jill went up the hill", but our focus will be on the first usage.

The second is 'or'. Again, we're primarily interested in it as a sentence connective, like in "Either Jill went up the hill or Jack tumbled down the hill."

The third is 'not'. Our primary use for this is very stilted, as in "It's not the case that Jack stayed home". That's very non-standard English: it's much better to say "Jack didn't stay home". But we can understand what "It's not the case that Jack stayed home" means - it just means Jack didn't stay home.

The fourth is 'if', as in "If Jack fell down the hill, Jill fell down the hill too". We'll spend a lot of time in this course on 'if', so I'll leave it at this for now.

And the last is 'if and only if', which we sometimes write as i-f-f.

The logic we get out of this is very simple, but incredibly weak. It doesn't even let us regiment arguments like the Skippy argument. But it's a good argument to start with.

<new slide>

We're not going to do predicate logic in this course, but I thought I'd mention what it is we're not doing.

In predicate logic you add a bunch more structural features of language into the scope of logic.

For one thing, you add some syntax. So logic now cares about the differences between names (like Skippy), variables (roughly speaking, pronouns in natural language), predicates (like adjectives, verbs and common nouns), and determiners.

And it treats two of these determiners: **All** and **Some** as logical terms.

This is a lot to do, and we're not going to cover it in this course.

<new slide>

Every logic has a formalism. The formalism for classical propositional logic is relatively simple. We need symbols for each possible sentence. And we need symbols for the five connectives. I introduced these last week, but in case you need a reminder, here they are.

The symbol for 'and' is this upside down vee.

The symbol for 'or' is a vee.

The symbol for 'not' is a dash with a small vertical line down at the end. (Though if you're just typing, a dash will do.)

And the symbols for both conditionals are arrows.

<new slide>

So I'm going to end today by talking about how to translate sentences from the language of propositional logic back into English.

Any translation exercise has to start with two things. One is a dictionary telling you what sentence each sentence letter stands for, and the other is a sentence that needs translating.

So here the the dictionary is that A is that Lucky is a koala and B is that Skippy is a kangaroo. We'll stick with this dictionary the rest of the way.

Our first sentence is negation symbol, then A. That is, the sentence It's not the case that A. Since A is that Lucky is a koala, this sentence says that Lucky is **not** a koala.

> - $\neg A$ = _Lucky is not a koala_.

<new slide>

This says that either A or B is the case. That is, either Lucky is a koala, or Skippy is a kangaroo.

<new slide>

The big thing about these connectives is that they can be iterated. They can join shorter sentences into longer sentences, and then these longer sentences can be joined into even longer sentences.

To read these sentences with multiple connectives, you start from the inside and work outwards. So this is an 'and' sentence. The left hand side it says that it isn't the case that B. That is, it isn't the case that Skippy is a kangaroo. And the right hand side of it says that A. That is, it says that Lucky is a koala. So between them it says Skippy is not a kangaroo and Lucky is a koala.

<new slide>

Last one. This is an if then sentence. The first part of the if then, the condition, is an or-sentence. It says that either Lucky is a koala or Skippy is a kangaroo. The second part, the then part, is an and sentence. It says that Lucky is a koala and Skippy is a kangaroo. So the whole sentence says if Lucky is a koala or Skippy is a kangaroo, then Lucky is a koala and Skippy is a kangaroo.

<new slide>

Next time, we'll start looking at truth tables to test for whether something is a tautology.