Hello, and welcome to Philosophy 305 - Introduction to Formal Methods

Lecture 3.2 - Tautologies

<new slide>

This lecture is about how we use truth tables to check for logical properties. In particular, we are going to look at using truth tables to determine whether a sentence is or is not a tautology.

<new slide>

forall x, chapter 12, especially section 12.1.

<new slide>

The big picture here is the variety of uses to which truth tables can be put. But to get there, we will start with using truth tables to work out which sentences are, and are not, tautologies.

<new slide>

What's a tautology? Well, by definition, it's a sentence that gets the value T in every row of the truth table. So it has to be true, no matter what values the underlying sentences take.

<new slide>

Could any sentence be like that? Yes. In fact, let's look at some examples.

<new slide>

Some of the simple tautologies are important enough to have simple names. The sentence A or not A, for instance, is known as the law of excluded middle.

Think about why it is true. A is either true or false. If A is true, the left hand disjunct (i.e., A itself) is true. If A is false, the right hand disjunct (i.e., not A) is true. Either way, the disjunction is true. So it's a tautology.

<new slide>

Our next one is the law of non-contradiction. It says that it is not the case that A and not A are both true. In general, it's saying that a contradiction, A and not A, is not true. Hence the name, the law of non-contradiction.

Why is it always true? Well, it's because what is inside the brackets on the right is always false. And it's always false because either A is true, and hence not A is false, or A is false, and hence the conjunction is false.

So we get that it is not the case that A and not A are both true, for any A at all.

<new slide>

The next one doesn't have as common a name, but I'll call it a reflexive conditional. We're going to use the word 'reflexive' a lot meaning something that refers back to itself. And here the intuitive idea is that the conditional says that if a condition is met, then that very condition is the case. That sounds plausible. And indeed the truth table says that it has to be true.

<new slide>

But some of the tautologies involving conditionals are much more surprising. This is one we worked through already: either if A then B, or if B then A.

<new slide>

All tautologies are logical truths. If something is true on every row, then it has to be true.

But not all logical truths are tautologies. Some sentences may be guaranteed by logic alone to be true, but the truth tables are too crude a tool to detect that.

One example is on the slide: If Brian is necessarily human, then Brian is human. Another set of examples involves quantifiers like 'all'. The sentence "All frogs are frogs" is a logical truth, but it isn't a tautology.

Still, the tautologies are logical truths, and that's useful.

<new slide>

Next time, we'll use the truth tables to start doing checks for validity.
