Hello, and welcome to Philosophy 305 - Introduction to Formal Methods

Lecture 3.3 - Validity

<new slide>

This lecture is about how we use truth tables to check for whether an argument is valid.

<new slide>

We're still in chapter 12 of forall x, now with a focus on 12.4.

<new slide>

We talked last time about using truth tables to check for whether something is a tautology. Now we're going to use them to check for validity.

<new slide>

Here's the test for validity. 

Build the truth table for the premises and the conclusion.

Look at every line where all the premises are true. If the conclusion is true in all those lines, that's a valid argument.

If not, then it isn't truth-functionally valid. 

<new slide>

We can say the same thing the other way around. Here's a test for invalidity.

Build the truth table for the premises and the conclusion.

Is there a line where the premises are true and the conclusion false?

If so, the argument is invalid.

If not, the argument is valid.

This test is harder to state - it uses more negations. But in practice it is often easier to use.

<new slide>

So here is one example of an invalid argument: A, therefore A and B.

It's invalid because of line 2. That's a line where all the premises - all one of them - are true, and the conclusion is false.

<new slide>

Here is another example of an invalid argument; this one is also invalid because of the second line. The argument says If A then B, therefore If A then C. That doesn't sound good! And it's not - at line 2 we have a true premise and a false conclusion.

<new slide>

But here is a valid argument. From If A then B, and If B then C, conclude If A then C. The premises are both true at lines 1, 5, 7 and 8. And the conclusion is true at all those lines; and a couple more spare.

<new slide>

That's more than enough for this lecture. Next time, we'll finish up the discussion of truth tables and validity.

