Hello, and welcome to Philosophy 305 - Introduction to Formal Methods

Lecture 3.4 - Features of Validity

<new slide>

This is the last lecture on truth tables. We'll finish up looking more closely at how to use truth tables to determine validity.

<new slide>

forall x, chapter 12, sections 12.5-12.7.

<new slide>

So let's start with the big picture that we ended last time with.

If every row where the premises are all T also has the conclusion be T, then the argument is valid.

If there is a row where the premises are T and the conclusion is F, then the argument is invalid. Well, it is definitely invalid in some sense, and possibly invalid in a more important sense. We'll come back to this point.

<new slide>

This definition of validity has some odd consequences.

Consider any argument where the conclusion is a tautology, like the one on this slide. Premise A, conclusion B or not B.

<new slide>

Anyway, this argument has a tautology for a conclusion. So it's impossible for the conclusion to be false. So it's impossible for the premise to be true and the conclusion false. So it's valid. And it's valid even though the premises are completely irrelevant to the conclusion. The conclusion doesn't even share any sentence letters with the premises - its only letter is B, and the premises only letter is A.

<new slide>

But this notion of validity, as well as having odd consequences like the one on the previous slide, has some nice consequences. To see these, it requires to set out the truth table method a bit more carefully.

So far I've described truth tables almost geometrically. I've been talking about rows and columns, and about how the position of a character in a table has certain meaning. We can do the same thing but without these picturesque definitions, and instead in a way that might look more familiar from other parts of mathematics.

Say that a truth-functional valuation is a function from sentences to these two truth values true and false that satisfies the following four conditions.

First, the value of a negated sentence is the opposite of the value of the unnegated sentence.

Second, the value of a disjunctive sentence is True if and only if the value of one is the disjuncts is True.

Third, the value of a conjunctive sentence is True if and only if the value of both of the conjuncts is true.

Fourth, the value of a conditional is True if either the value of the antcedent is False, or the value of the consequent is True.

Then instead of talking about what's true in all rows of a table, we can talk about what's true in all possible valuations.

<new slide>

In general, relative to a class of valuations we can define a notion of validity.

An argument is valid relative to that class of valuations if whenever the premises all get the value True, so does the conclusion.

One special class of valuations is the class defined on the previous slide.

We'll say that an argument is truth-functionally valid when it is valid relative to that class of valuations. That is, when whenever one of those valuations makes all the premises true, it makes the conclusion true as well. And that is just equivalent to saying that all the lines on the truth table that make the premises true also make the conclusion true.

<new slide>

As I mentioned a bit earlier, we sometimes use this notation with a double horizontal bar to refer to a kind of validity that's defined with respect to valuations. This isn't going to matter much in this course. But you'll see both symbols in Boxes and Diamonds for example. The short version for now is that you don't have to worry about this difference, but it becomes very important if you do further logic courses.

<new slide>

But this isn't a logic course, it's a formal methods course. We want to learn these methods so we can use them elsewhere in philosophy. And let's return to that.

And in particular, I want to run through some nice features this notion of validity has, features that make it particularly useful.

For one thing, it has this nice closure property. If some premises imply that A, and those premises imply that If A then B, then those premises always imply B. That sounds like it should be true, right?

<new slide>

Here's how we prove it is true. Assume it isn't. Assume that those premises - I'm calling them Gamma, don't imply B. On the truth table method, non-implication means there is a row on the truth table where the premises all come out True and the conclusion comes out false. The conclusion is B, so this is a row where everything in Gamma is True, and B is false. So that's what our assumption comes to.

<new slide>

That row on the truth table, that valuation, has to either make A come out True, or A come out False.

<new slide>

If it makes A come out True, well think about what happens next. We said already that B is False on this row. And if A is true and B is false, then A arrow B will be False - we can tell that by looking up the table for arrow. That means that there is a row on the truth table where everything in Gamma is True, and A arrow B is false. But we assumed this is impossible, that Gamma guarantees A arrow B. So we can't have that.

<new slide>

If A is false, well then we have a row on the truth table where everything in Gamma is true, and A is false. But we said Gamma guarantees the truth of A.

Either way, we get a contradiction. There can't be such a row. There can't be a row where everything in Gamma is true and B is false. So the argument from Gamma to B is valid.

<new slide>

OK, here's another feature of this notion of validity that is useful to know about. It says that if an argument is valid, then adding premises doesn't make it invalid.

That is, assume you've got one argument you know to be valid. Call it the old argument. Then generate a new argument by taking the old argument and just adding some premises. Call this, imaginatively, the new argument. We're going to prove that the new argument is valid.

<new slide>

Here's the proof. Assume that our original argument is valid, then consider the new argument that has more premises. And think about any row on the truth table where all the premises of the new argument are true.

<new slide>

Well, all the premises of the old argument are premises of the new argument, since by hypothesis the new argument has all the premises of the old argument plus maybe some more.

<new slide>

And we assumed that the premises of the new argument are all true on a particular row, so the premises of the old argument are all true too.

<new slide>

So this is a row where the premises of the old argument are true.

<new slide>

But the old argument is valid. So any row where its premises are true, its conclusion is true. And its conclusion is the same as the conclusion of the new argument. So if the premises of the new argument are true, its conclusion must be as well. So the new argument is valid.

<new slide>

This might have seemed like a lot of work for something that's kind of obvious. But I think it isn't that obvious - that the principle we've shown here is at least a little surprising.

<new slide>

In general in reasoning adding premises can turn good arguments into bad ones. Here's a famous example.

This looks like a good - though totally not valid - argument. From the premise that Tweety is a bird, infer that Tweety flies. That seems ok, right?

<new slide>

But now here's a new argument that just adds another premise.

The new premise says that Tweety is black and white, lives in Antarctica, lays large eggs etc. Tweety's a penguin! And penguins don't fly. So this looks like bad reasoning.

In general for human reasoning, adding premises can make things worse. But for logical reasoning, adding premises cannot make things worse.

<new slide>

OK, let's move onto a different formal feature of validity. It satisfies this odd looking principle. Here's what the principle says. Make two assumptions.

First, that the argument from the set of premises Gamma to A is valid.

Second, that the argument from the set of premises Delta, plus A, to B, is valid.

Then the argument from Gamma plus Delta to B will be valid.

<new slide>

This principle is really crucial for being able to do long chains of reasoning. We implicitly use this kind of principle all the time in any kind of complicated reasoning.

<new slide>

OK, but let's prove that it works. Well we've made these assumptions about validity. We're now going to prove that every line that makes all of Gamma and Delta True also makes B true.

<new slide>

If everything in Gamma is true, and Gamma implies A, then A is true.

<new slide>

And if A plus everything in Delta is true, then by our second assumption B is true.

So every line where Gamma and Delta are all true, so is B. So the argument with premises Gamma and Delta, and conclusion B, is valid.

<new slide>

OK, last of these formal features. The notion of validity we've defined makes these two claims equivalent.

First, the argument with premises Gamma and conclusion If A then B is valid.

Second, the argument with premises Gamma plus A, and conclusion B is valid.

We showed this for the proof system in Carnap, now we're going to show it for the truth tables.

<new slide>

First, assume Gamma implies If A then B. That is assume that every row that makes all of Gamma true makes If A then B true.

We're now going to show that every row that makes Gamma plus A true also makes B true.

Well, by assumption, Gamma therefore A arrow B is valid. So if everything in Gamma is true, A arrow B is true.

And the only row where A and A arrow B are both true is where B is true as well. So we're done - Gamma plus A guarantee the truth of B.

<new slide>

The other direction is a little messier, but only a little.

Assume the argument from Gamma plus A to B is valid. And now prove that Gamma therefore A arrow B is valid.

To do this, we have to show that if all the sentences in Gamma are True on a row, so is A arrow B.

<new slide>

Well, there are two cases, either A is true on this row or it is false. We'll do them in turn.

<new slide>

If A is true, then the fact that Gamma plus A entails B means that B has to be true. 

<new slide>

So that case is easy.

<new slide>

If A is false, then by the truth tables for arrow, A arrow B is true. 

<new slide>

So either way, A arrow B is true, as required.

<new slide>

And this is a really notable result. It shows that proving If A then B is really just like proving B, with the extra premise of A. And that's what we want.

But notably, the proof only works if you use the weird looking truth table for arrow that we started with.

And that's philosophically significant. No one thinks that's a very natural looking truth table for arrow. But what plenty of people do think is that arrow should interact with validity in the way we've discussed in the last few slides. And the odd truth table - T on lines 1, 3 and 4, F on line 2, is required to make that happen.

<new slide>

OK, enough about truth tables. Next time we'll move on to discussing truth trees, which are a different way to test arguments for validity. 