Hello, and welcome to Philosophy 305 - Introduction to Formal Methods

Lecture 3.5 - Truth Trees

<new slide>

Today we're going to be looking at a new way of testing for validity: truth trees.

The idea behind truth trees is that you list some sentences and assign truth values to them, then you list what has to be the case for those original sentences to have the assigned values. Sometimes you find there is no way for the sentences to have those values. So, for instance, you find there is no way for some sentences to be true while another is false. And that implies that the argument from the first sentences to the last one is valid. That's the big picture - let's start looking at the details.

<new slide>

Forall x doesn't cover truth trees, so we're using Boxes and Diamonds. This lecture is from section 2.1.

<new slide>

I'm going back and forth between calling these trees and tableaux. They are two names for the same thing. But different books will use one name or the other for them, so it's good to have both names.

In the first instance they are tests for what things can be the case at the same time.

In principle they can be used for any such tests.

But what we're mostly interested in is taking an argument, and seeing if the premises can be true at the same time the conclusion is false. If so, the argument is invalid. If not, it is valid.

<new slide>

Here's how we go about building them.

We start with the things we care about, e.g., that the premises of an argument are true, and its conclusion is false.

<new slide>

Then we say what else has to be the case given what we've written down. For example, if we've said that a conjunction is true, each conjunct has to be true. Or if we've said that a disjunction is false, each disjunct has to be false.

<new slide>

Sometimes there are multiple ways for something we've written to be the case. For example, a disjunction can be true because either the first disjunct is the case, or the second disjunct is the case.

When we've written down something that has multiple ways of coming about, we create branches for the two ways.

<new slide>

The result is that we get something with branches. Like a tree!

We say one of these branches is closed if it includes incompatible claims. For now, what we mean by incompatibility is that one sentence is both true and false.

<new slide>

We'll say that the whole tree, or the whole tableau, is closed just in case all the branches are closed.

If there is just one branch - the trunk - this will just mean that it is closed. But the usual case will be that there is more than one branch.

<new slide>

A closed tableau means that the initial assumptions were incompatible. They couldn't be true at once.

And this means, if the initial assumptions were that the premises were true and the conclusion false, that the argument is valid.

If you build a tableau for an argument, starting with true premises and false conclusion, and it closes, the argument is valid.

<new slide>

If you build a tableau starting with just the claim that a particular sentence is false, and that tableau closes, the sentence is a logical truth.

<new slide>

Everything we are doing today with tableau we could do with truth tables. So why bother working through yet another method? Well, they have two big advantges over truth tables.

First, they don't grow exponentially. Remember, a truth table with five atomic sentence letters already has 32 lines. The size of a tableau grows linearly with the growth in complexity of the underlying arguments, while a truth table grows exponentially. And replacing exponential growth in difficulty with linear growth is a good thing.

<new slide>

Second, tableau are, with some adjustments, useful for things beyond propositional logic. And that's why I'm introducing them here. We're going to use tableau a lot when we get to modal logic. And we couldn't use truth tables for the same purpose. So we may as well start on them now.

<new slide>

Boxes and Diamonds doesn't make a big deal of this, but tableau aren't just a way of showing that an argument is valid. They can also show that an argument is invalid.

If you complete a tableau, and we'll have a bit to say about what complete means in this context, and it is open, i.e., not closed, the argument is invalid.

<new slide>

Now the relevant notion of completeness is a bit tricky, and I think it's easier to see how it works in practice than in theory.

So let's get on to actually building them.

<new slide>

What we're using is called a signed tableau system. Every line has a sentence and a sign. And by sign here, we just mean a truth value. Why 'signed'? Well think of true and false here as like positive and negative. And in this model, negation is like multiplying by minus one.

<new slide>

So each line says that a sentence has a truth value. You have to be a bit careful saying just what lines in branches mean - and that's why on the slides I disagree with the book a bit - but the short version is that each line is saying how things have to be if the initial assumptions are correct.

<new slide>

Trees, or tableau, are fairly common, and you might see other books using them. But there is no convention on precisely how they should be used. So let me end this lecture by noting a couple of things that we're going to do, but which are a bit arbitrary.

First, we're going to number all the lines. This is just so we can refer back to them easily.

<new slide>

Second, we're going to list justifications for what we write down to the right of the tree. 

<new slide>

Just about the only part of logic for which the conventions are tightly established are truth tables. (Even there different books will have slightly different wrinkles about some presentational matters.) Everywhere else, there are all sorts of little things where everyone has their own idiosyncratic way of doing things. This isn't like arithmetic where the conventions are really really well established. But hopefully what I'm teaching you will be enough to understand what others are using trees for wherever you see them.

<new slide>

Next time we'll get into the details of how these trees get built.