Hello, and welcome to Philosophy 305 - Introduction to Formal Methods

Lecture 3.6 - Rules for Truth Trees

<new slide>

Last lecture was all fairly abstract - it's time to get on to looking at the particular rules for how we build a tree.

<new slide>

We're still in Boxes and Diamonds, but now it's sections 2.2 and 2.3.

<new slide>

So, the rules I'm talking about are rules from how you get from one line to the next.

There is, I'm afraid, a little bit of memorisation here. But hopefully the memorisation isn't too hard, because the rules in question are mostly pretty easy to remember.

<new slide>

For each connective, there is a rule for the True version of the sentence and a rule for the false version.

For negation, these rules are pretty easy to remember. You drop the negation and flip the sign. So a true negated sentence becomes a false unnegated sentence. And what this means is that if not A is true, then A has to be false.

<new slide>

On the other hand, if you've said that Not A is false, then A has to be true. So the rule for false negated sentences says that if a negated sentence is false, the unnegated version is true.

<new slide>

So these should be pretty easy to remember. Just flip the sign and remove a negation.

<new slide>

OK, what about for and? Well, if A and B is true, then A has to be true and B has to be true. So if you've got a true conjunction, you write down two things being true.

<new slide>

But what about a false conjunction? This is trickier. 

A conjunction can be false in two different ways. The left hand side could be false, or the right hand side could be false.

So if you see that a conjunction is false, you have to start two branches, one for each conjunct.

<new slide>

So here's what you have to remember.

If you have a true conjunction, write down each conjunct, one under the other, in the same branch (or trunk) you started with.

If you have a false conjunction, create two branches, one for each way it can be false.

<new slide>

Disjunction is the reverse of this.

If you have a true disjunction, create two branches for the two disjuncts. In each branch, you say that a disjunct is true.

If you have a false disjunction, you don't branch, you stay in the same thread. And you say that each of the disjuncts is false.

Remember that for A or B to be false, both A has to be false and B has to be false. That's why we don't branch - we know already the truth value of both disjuncts.

<new slide>

So far everything has looked reasonably smooth. The last connective has harder to remember rules.

The thing to remember is that A arrow B is equivalent to a disjunction: Not A or B. And the rules for Arrow are just the rules you would expect if we replaced A arrow B with Not A or B.

So understood, arrow sentences are disjunctions. So they can be true in two ways. The left hand side can be false, or the right hand side can be true.

And that's the rule for the True Arrow sentences.

<new slide>

On the other hand, there is only one way for a disjunction to be false: both sides have to not be the case.

So if an arrow sentence is false, we infer that its left hand side is true, and its right hand side is false.

<new slide>

But this is hard to remember - hopefully it will get a bit easier with practice.

<new slide>

Next time we'll start that practice, looking at building up some truth trees.